# 21 February 2018

## Hosting a website on Dat

- Build website.
- Create `dat.json` in the root of the site directory.
- Add a `web_root` field to `dat.json` in the root of the site directory.
- Set value of  `web_root` to the build directory, e.g. `_site`.
- Run `dat share` in the root of the site directory.
- Clone dat archive address.
- Run `dat sync` in the cloned, read-only archive to seed the site.
- Alternatively, upload the site to `hashbase.io`.

### Solved problems

- Originally I created the archive in the build directory. Then the `.dat` 
  directory was deleted the next time I built the site.
- My first attempt to solve this was by copying the `.dat` directory to the 
  project root and then symlinking it to `_site` directory.
- Second solution was using the `web_root` field in `dat.json`. This enabled me 
  to create the archive in the project root and serve the site from the `_site`
  directory.
- I needed to create a separate build configuration for the dat version of the 
  site. This version sets relative instead of absolute URLs.
- Deploying remotely. I created two scripts: `deploy-dat.sh` and 
 `deploy-dat-remote.sh`. `deploy-dat-remote.sh` logs into the remote server and 
 runs `deploy-dat.sh`.

### Unsolved problems

- There doesn't seem to be a way to run `dat share` and then quit. This means 
  that I can't do a fully automated deployment. I still have to wait for the
  changes to be published and then hit `Ctrl-c`. I'm not sure if I'm thinking of 
  this in the wrong way and I should have `dat share` _always_ running in the
  background.
- How should I managing the Dat private key(s?)? It seems easy to lose them.
- I've made a lot of one-off junk Dat archives to test stuff and I have 
  inadvertantly published secret/sensitive/private data to a couple of Dat 
  archives. Is it really unlikely that someone can find this information? And
  are there so many Dat addresses that they can be used carelessly?
