# 11 July 2018

## Formal grammar explainer

- the goal is to understand how context-free grammars work
- the goal is to understand the process of replacement
- visualize the parse tree of a formal grammar
- enable the user to step through a formal grammar they have written
- write a grammar that describes a set of strings including, and not including

Interactions

- maybe use a maze as a metaphor
- or use a path as a metaphor
- the little man advances along the path
- unlocks doors using characters
- wants to get to one of the terminal characters
- the terminal characters are his destination
- the user guides him to the destination
- the user has to show the man how to get to his destination
- or it can just animate the man going to his destination
- show the maze and the formal grammar side-by-side
- choose a path by clicking on a node in the parse tree
- get a score for finding the way to get to the right path?
- make it an interactive story
- path through a maze?
- path down from a mountain?
- maybe he wants to eat these things
- the terminal symbols are things that he eats?
- how do you identify terminal characters?
- validate that all grammars end in a 
- maybe he's this guy who likes to eat sentences
- some sentences are healthy for him to eat
- other sentences are unhealthy for him to eat
- how does he know what sentences are safe?
- health/safety isn't the right metaphor
- the idea of formal grammar is in/out of the language
- makes sense / doesn't make sense is kind of the meaning or in/out of language 
- every sentence is a map?
- does he recognize this sentence?
- does he know this sentence?
- maybe it's not a man but the character itself that you identify with
- it's like the char is on a quest
- it meets the first gatekeeper
- if it matches that pattern, it advances to the second gatekeeper, and so on
- if it doesn't, the gatekeeper eats it
- if it doesn't, the gatekeeper rejects it
- so the character passes through these tests
- start by popping letters off the beginning of the string
- but that's not how the grammar is evaluated
- the grammar is evaluated by taking the first nonterminal symbol and applying it to the first character?
- [Lambda Lessons](http://stevekrouse.com/hs.js/): I like how this is driven by
  clicking

## Context-free grammar

- describes all possible strings for a given language
- set of replacement rules
- non-terminal symbols are replaced with terminal symbols

```
$ = F

F = 'f'
```

- one to one (one non-terminal symbol for each terminal symbol)
- many to one rules (many non-terminal symbols resolve to the same one terminal)

> Rules can also be applied in reverse to check if a string is grammatically 
> correct according to the grammar.

maybe it's just a box that you type in and it highlights the path through the
parse tree?

> linguists have described the grammars of languages in terms of their block 
> structure, and described how sentences are recursively built up from smaller 
> phrases, and eventually individual words or word elements.

> A context-free grammar provides a simple and mathematically precise mechanism 
> for describing the methods by which phrases in some natural language are built 
> from smaller blocks, capturing the "block structure" of sentences in a natural 
> way.

Maybe he is a collector of sentences.
He only has a certain sentences that he likes.

```
$ = foo, bar 
  | bar, baz 
  | baz;

foo = 'x';

bar = 'y' 
    | baz, baz;

baz = 'z'
```

> he basic recursive structure of sentences, the way in which clauses nest 
> inside other clauses, and the way in which lists of adjectives and adverbs are 
> swallowed by nouns and verbs, is described exactly.

Maybe it's something like a language-judge.
He needs a quit way to separate sentences that people like and sentences that 
people don't like.
Maybe he's this guy who works for this guy that likes to read.
But Reader was very strict, very particular about what he liked to read.
If he was given something that he didn't like to read, he would throw an Error.
He would get very angry and the entire house would fall down.
It wasn't good if the entire house fell down.
So there's a guy who likes to read and another guy who lives with him and is a 
bit afraid of the house falling down.
The second guy will read anything.
But he reads things just to make sure that they're the kind of thing that the 
other guy 
So there's this guy who lives in a house.
The guy is very smart. He can answer a lot of questions.
But he never leaves the house and he doesn't like to talk to people.
So the people send him letters.
The letters describe these questions they have.
They want to know the answers to these questions.
Now this guy is happy to answer questions but he insists that they are written in 
a way that he likes.
If they're not written that way, he gets angry and starts to yell and shout about
what's wrong with the question, and then the house starts to shake and sometimes
the house falls down.
So then they have to rebuild the house.
And the other brother doesn't like this.
He's developed a way to 
He's good at answering questions, but only certains kinds of questions asked in 
a specific way.
Maybe what you get is a drawing.
He's good at making designs.
So people send him descriptions of the designs, he makes them, and sends them 
back.
Maybe don't focus on what he does with the strings.
Just focus on whether its something he likes or doesn't like.

## Learnable Programming by Brett Victor

[Learnable Programming](http://worrydream.com/LearnableProgramming/)

> A programming environment is a user interface for understanding a program. 
> Especially in an environment for learning, the environment must be designed 
> to explain.

> great explanations is that they are often embedded in the context of what 
> they are explaining

> follow the program over time

> The entire purpose of code is to manipulate data, and we never see the data. 
> We write with blindfolds, and we read by playing pretend with data-phantoms in 
> our imaginations.

> If you are serious about creating a programming environment for learning, the 
> number one thing you can do -- more important than live coding or adjustable 
> constants, more important than narrated lessons or discussion forums, more 
> important than badges or points or ultra-points or anything else -- is to 
> show the data.

> In order to understand what a line of code does, the learner must see its 
> effect.

> Working in the head doesn't scale. The head is a hardware platform that 
> hasn't been updated in millions of years. To enable the programmer to achieve 
> increasingly complex feats of creativity, the environment must get the 
> programmer out of her head, by providing an external imagination where the 
> programmer can always be reacting to a work-in-progress.

> The environment is the user interface for working with a program.

> The goal is to change people's relationship with text. People currently think 
> of text as information to be consumed. I want text to be used as an 
> environment to think in.



- slider to walk through the steps
- timeline
