# 06 March 2018

## "Haskell from First Principles" Chapter 8: function recursion

Recursion is a composition of a function with itself.

The Lambda calculus implements recursion through the Y combinator.
In the Lambda calculus, there's no way to reference to a function after it has
been applied.
The function is lost once it is applied.
The Y combinator fixes this problem.

_bottom_: refers to a computation that does not produce a value.

common varieties of a bottom:

- computations that produce an error
- computations that don't stop running
- partial functions (functions that don't handle all cases of input)

A "go" function is a common idiom in Haskell.
`go` is a locally defined function that takes more arguments than the outer
function.
The `go` function is used for implementation details of recursion that don't
need to be exposed to the caller.
The `go` function is the recursive function and not the outer function.

In this example, `go` is used so the caller doesn't have to provide a `count`
value.

```haskell
dividedBy :: Integral a => a -> a -> (a, a)
dividedBy num denom = go num denom 0
  where go n d count
          | n < d = (count, n)
          | otherwise =
            go (n - d) d (count + 1)
```

## Chapter 8 Exercises

1. d
2. b
3. d
4. b
5. "woops rmow woohoo!"
6. "1 mrow haha"
7. "woops mrow 2 mrow haha"
8. "pink mrow haha mrow green mrow woops mrow blue"
9. "are mrow Pugs mrow awesome"

### Recursion

1. Write out evaluation steps for `dividedBy 15 2`

```haskell
dividedBy 15 2 =
  go 15 2 0

  go (15 - 2) 2 (0 + 1)
  go (13 - 2) 2 (1 + 1)
  go (11 - 2) 2 (2 + 1)
  go (9 - 2) 2 (3 + 1)
  go (7 - 2) 2 (4 + 1)
  go (5 - 2) 2 (5 + 1)
  go (3 - 2) 2 (6 + 1)
  | 1 < 2 = (7, 1)

(7, 1)
```

2. Write a function that takes a number `n` and recursively sums 1 to `n`.

```haskell
sumN (Eq a, Num a) => a -> a -> a
sumN n = go n 0
  where go n sum
          | n == 0 = sum
          | otherwise =
              go (n - 1) (sum + n)
```

3. Write a function that multiplies to integral numbers using recursive 
summation.

```haskell
multN :: Integral a => a -> a -> a
multN x y = go x y 0
  where go x y prod
          | y < 1 = prod
          | otherwise =
              go x (y - 1) (x + prod)
```

1. Expand `dividedBy` to handle negative denominators and 0.
