# 04 April 2018

Principles

- Learn from first principles

State of mind:

- I can't tell if I don't like front end development or if I don't like working
  my current work as a front end developer.
- I like being a generalist programmer.
- I'm most interested in the common ground shared by programming discplines than
  I am by any one discipline.

Desired outcomes:

- a compiler for a language I've designed (learn Haskell)
- do backend work at Shore (learn Ruby)
- work in newsrooms doing data journalism (learn SQL, Python, d3, statistics)
- write blog posts

Things I've been doing recently:

- Scraped data from Lobste.rs using Python.
- Learned SQL basics.
- Queried data using Postgres.
- Ran a data analysis project at work using Python and SQL.
- Built a visualization of some data from Lobste.rs.
- Read most of Learn You a Haskell
- Read the first chapter of Haskell from First Principles

Things I've found interesting recently:

- Scraping web pages is pretty easy and makes me wonder what data there is to 
  be scraped.
- The idea of _replacement_ in formalisms like context-free grammar and the 
  lambda calculus. I'm fascinated that I've encountered this idea in two 
  different places.
- Analysing data.

Ideas:

- Read and complete the projects in _Why's Poignant Guide to Ruby_.

What are some things that I want to do?

- Answer "Are there popular users on Lobste.rs?"

Questions that I have or things I think are interesting

- How do great circle flight paths work?
- How do the Church numerals work?
- What are other ways of numeral encoding?
- What would a numeral encoding explorer look like?
- Is there an improvement on Tracery? Something fully language?
- How does substitution work in context-free grammar and lambda calculus?
- What is to the lambda calculus as brainfuck is to a Turing machine?

12 1 week projects

Write a Mastodon cli client in Ruby
