# 6 December 2018

## 2018 Review

2018 was a year where I started building some good habits.

### Fitness

I started working out with a personal trainer in February.
I hadn't done any exercise in two years.
I was overweight and had very little muscle.
At the first session, I could only do three pushups.

Neil, my trainer, taught me to lift weights.
I gradually got into better shape.
I learned major compound lifts including squat, bench press, deadlift, and
overhead press.
I also learned accessory work using dumbbells and body weight.

Fitness has been a frustrating topic.
I often felt like my progress was too slow and I was getting delayed by
injuries.
I started Jim Wendler's 5/3/1 program in September and I think that has been
working reasonably well.

My two biggest issues right now are excess body fat and form.
I want to lose the body fat by next summer.
I need to fix my form on squat and deadlift to progress in those lifts.

One important discovery I made in 2018 is that regular morning exercise is
essential for my mental health.
When I work out in the morning, my mood is lifted, my mind is cleared, I am more
focused, and I have more energy.
I can bear the burden of the day much better.
When I work out in the evening, these effects do not carry over into the next 
day.

### Started learning German

I started attending an A1-level German class twice weekly in February.
I already knew a bit of German from Duolingo but this was my first time really
learning and especially speaking German.
The class has been very helpful.
Now I can speak some German, I can read a German picture book I received for 
Christmas last year, and I can understand bits of German conversation I overhear
in Munich.

Throughout the year, I've felt a lot of internal tension around learning German.
Part of me feels like I will never really learn to speak the language so spending
any time studying it is a waste.
I also feel guilty that I do not study German in my free time.
I've even stopped doing the homework.
I feel guilty about this because I know that I would be better at German if I 
devoted more time to it.
But I also have other things I want to spend that time on.
So I'm caught in this trap where I resent German because I could be better but 
don't have the time to become better.

In general, my experience with German this year has been one of frustration and
fluctuating enthusiasm.
Am I going to class because I want to learn the language or because I feel 
obligated to go?
In theory, I want to learn the language.
But I also go because I feel obligated to go.
I would feel bad about myself if I lived in Germany and didn't make an attempt to
learn German.
And I hate that eventually, people will ask me "can you speak German?" when they
hear that I've lived in Germany and I won't be able to say definitively yes.

And yet, I am really learning German.
I can express some ideas and I can read a fair amount.
I think that instead of "studying" the language, I should try reading German 
children books instead.
Reading was the principal way in which I developed my ability to speak English.

Something that's been interesting to notice is that my attitude towards grammar
has changed.
When I was a student, I hated the topic of English grammar.
Memorizing rules scared me and instead, I formed my sentences by what sounded 
right.
This mostly works for me.

But I find that German grammar appeals to me.
Learning German grammar is the easiest part of the language.
Rules and forms and structure are what I reliably remember in German class.
I think the difference is a product of my exposure to programming.
Learning programming languages has drammatically enhanced my openness to and 
ability to absorb rules.

### Reading

I read 14 books this year.
Most of these books I felt were worth reading.
Some were okay but don't represent anything important to me.
I've put a star next to those that I liked.

- * The Three-Body Problem
- The Pleasure of Finding Things Out
- To Be a Machine 
- * The Dark Forest
- * Death's End
- * Flash Boys
- * So Good They Can't Ignore You
- * Deep Work
- * The Signal and the Noise
- * Antifragile
- Seneca: Dialogues and Essay
- * Mindstorms
- Bitwise: a Life in Code
- Mr. Penumbra's 24 Hour Bookstore

I started 13 other books that I did not finish:

- The Inner Game of Tennis
- Atomic Habits
- Hieroglyph (sci-fi short stories)
- Sourdough
- The Dark Labyrinth
- The Design of Everyday Things
- Thinking, Fast and Slow
- Quiet
- Naked Statistics
- The Go Programming Language
- The Stuff of Bits
- Sapiens
- The Odyssey

Overall, I feel that my reading has been slow, unenthusiastic, and unfocused.
I like spending time on things that make me stronger and more capable in some 
way.
I like working out because then I can lift more weight and I look better.
I like going to German class because then I can speak more German.
I like learning to program and writing programs because then I can be a better
programmer.

But I'm not really sure what I'm doing when I read.
In the last year, I just read whatever came a long.
There wasn't a theme or a larger goal.
I read one book on one topic and a second book on a completely different topic.

My reading in the last year feels meandering, uninspired, and aimless.
I'm not really sure how to relate to reading.
Should I read more?
What should I read?
Is there a way to read faster, to make reading something I want to do more?

What are some books I would like to read next year?

- Code 2.0 by Lawrence Lessig
- The Wealth of Networks by Yochai Benkler
- Unix Network Programming by W. Richard Stevens
- Parallel and Concurrent Programming in Haskell by Simon Marlow
- Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs

### Side projects

- Wrote 7 blog posts
- Completed 26 chapters of the Haskell book

## Monad Transformers

Here is a Monad instance for MaybeT.

```haskell
newtype MaybeT m a = MaybeT { runMaybeT :: m (Maybe a ) }

instance Monad m => Monad (MaybeT m) where
  return = pure
  (>>=) (MaybeT m1) f = MaybeT $ do
    m2 <- m1
    case m2 of
      Just x -> runMaybeT (f x)
      Nothing -> return Nothing
```

Why doesn't it typecheck when I move the final `MaybeT` into the branches of the
case expression?

```haskell
instance Monad m => Monad (MaybeT m) where
  return = pure
  (>>=) (MaybeT m1) f = do
    m2 <- m1
    case m2 of
      Just x -> MaybeT $ runMaybeT (f x)
      Nothing -> MaybeT $ return Nothing
```

Here is part of the compiler message:

```
• Occurs check: cannot construct the infinite type: m ~ MaybeT m
      Expected type: MaybeT m (Maybe a)
              Actual type: m (Maybe a)
```

This doesn't work because then `m1` has the wrong type.
When I change `MaybeT $ do` to `do`, then the result of the do block must be 
a `MaybeT m a` (the return type of `(>>=)`.
I was aware of that and thought that I was satisfying the requirement.
The case expression in the final term and its branches evaluate to `MaybeT m a`.

What I didn't understand is that every monad evaluated in the `do` block must 
have the same monad type.
The value inside each of these monads can be different, but the outer structure
must be the same.
When I removed `MaybeT` from the first line, then the compiler expects `m1` to 
be type `MaybeT`, but it's not.
