# 28 December 2018

## How to Design Programs

Steps to design a function:

1. From Problem Analysis to Data Definitions
  - what information is found in the problem?
  - how can that information be encoded as data?
  - create examples of the data
1. Signature, Purpose Statement, Header
  - what is the function's signature?
  - what does the function do (compute)?
  - stub the function
1. Functional Examples
  - create use-case examples for the function
1. Function Template
  - "Translate the data definitions into an outline of the function".
    I'm not sure what this means.
1. Function Definition
  - Implement the function.
1. Testing
  - Test that the implementation is correct.
  - Write a test for each function example.

>Examples play a central role at almost every stage.

I have noticed this myself: examples are a crucial component of documentation.
Sometimes the description of a function does not fully clarify how it should be
used or what it does.
Examples really help to clear up this ambiguity.
For me, examples are essential.

Bret Victor, and people that subscribe to Bret Victor, often focus on programming
languages as a problem.
The criticism is essentially that programming languages offer a poor user
experience.
As someone who avoided programming for a long time, was uncomfortable with math,
and does not have a computer science background - in other words, someone who is
not a native, I have not found that the user experience of textual programming
languages is particularly bad.

My hypothesis today is that a much bigger improvement can be made by changing the
way programming is taught.
When one learns to program, a programming language is often the primary topic.
It would be better if learning programming languages was secondary to learning
first principles.
If one focuses on learning a language, one will only have learned programming
incidentally, as a side-effect of learning the language.
Instead, one should learn a programming language as a side-effect of learning to
program.

My experience is that when people struggle with the kinds of things Bret Victor
blames on languages, it is not exactly the language's fault.
Or rather, that giving them a better language would not relieve their 
frustration.
Rather, they are frustrated because they have learned to use a programming 
language but they have not learned to program.
They haven't developed a strong intuition for expressing the world in terms of 
computing primitives.
And it is actually quite hard to find an introduction to these primitives.
They lurk at the edges, after a time one begins to sense them at the edges of the
web server and Space Invaders tutorials.

Not exactly to make better languages but to make languages secondary to good 
ideas.
And then base the new languages on those ideas.
Then the language is just a way to express/apply the good idea but is not itself
the focus.
