# 10 March 2018

## What does the "p" in `strptime` stand for?

`strptime` parses a string to a time or a datetime data structure.
The `p` stands for "parse".

**Links**

- [Man page: strptime](https://linux.die.net/man/3/strptime)
- [Stack Overflow: "What does the 'p' in strptime stand for?"](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/12255932/what-does-the-p-in-strptime-stand-for)

## What is the difference between Python's datetime `strftime` and `strptime`?

`strftime` is `Date -> String` and `strptime` is `String -> Date`, where `Date`
is the data type for a date.
In the case of Python's datetime library, both are instance methods of the 
`date`, `datetime`, and `time` classes.
The key to both is that they are used to convert a date from/to a string 
according to an explicit format string.

# What SQL datatype to use for a POSIX timestamp

The `INTEGER` SQL datatype is sufficient for a POSIX timestamp.
`INT(n)` is used to specify the display width, not the storage space reserved 
for the number. So, it is unnecessary to use `INT(n)`.

But it is recommended to store time values as native SQL `TIMESTAMP` datatypes 
inot nstead of a POSIX timestamp.
Using the native `TIMESTAMP` datatype makes it possible to use date-specific 
queries like ` ("SELECT DATE_ADD(my_datetime, INTERVAL 1 DAY)")`.
The date string can be converted to a POSIX timestamp after it is retreived from
the database.

**Links**

- [StackOverflow: "Should I use the datetime or timestamp data type in MySQL?"](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/1993509/field-type-for-unix-timestamp)
- [StackOverflow: "field type for unix timestamp"](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/1993509/field-type-for-unix-timestamp)
