# 4 January 2018

## Linux Command Line: Regular Expressions

Regular expressions are symbolic notations to identify patterns in text.

The POSIX standard regex is the most common set of symbols. There are other 
regex specifications that provide more.

### grep

`grep` (global regular expression print)

`grep -i`: ignore case

`grep -v`: invert match. prints every line that doesn't match pattern.

`grep -c, --count`: print the number of matches.

`grep -l`: print the name of each matching file instead of the line

`grep -L`: print only the names of files that do not contain matches.

`grep -n, --line-number`: print each matching line with the number of the 
line within the file.

### POSIX character classes

- `[:alnum:]`: alphanumeric characters; equivalent to `[A-Za-z0-9]`.
- `[:word:]`: adds `_` to the `[:alnum:]` set.
- `[:alpha:]`: alphabetic characters, uppercase and lowercase.
- `[:blank:]`: includes space and tab characters
- `[:cntrl:]`: ASCII-control codes
- `[:digit:]`: Numerals 0 through 9
- `[:graph:]`: Visible characters

- `\d` - any digit character
- `\D` - any non-digit character
- `\s` - any whitespace character
- `\S` - any non-whitepspace character
- `\w` - any word character `[A-Za-z0-9_]`
- `\W` - any non-word

#### Symbols and Metacharacters

**Basic Regular Expression (BRE)**

- `.`: any one character

**Position**

- `^`: match at the beginning of the line
- `$`: match at the end of the line

**Character classes**

- `[ ]`: match a set of characters. `[ab]` matches if string contains `a` or `b`.
- `[^ ]`: match if string does not contain any characters from the set.
- `[A-Z]`: `-` defines a range of characters. 
- `[A-Za-z0-9]`: multiple ranges
- `[-a-z]`: include the `-` character in the set by listing it first.
- `\( \)`: Must be escaped for BRE.
- `\{ \}`: Must be escaped for BRE.

#### Extended Regular Expression (ERE)

Requires `egrep` or `grep -E`.

- `|`: alternation operator. logical OR. matches against a set of expressions:
`'AAA|BBB|CCC'`.
- `( )`: groups metacharacters into a single symbol: `^(aa|bb|cc)`. Creates a 
numbered capturing group.
- `(?:)`: creates a non-capturing group.
- `?`: zero or one time
- `*`: zero or more times
- `+`: one or more times
- `{n}`: exact number of matches
- `{n,}`: minimum number of matches
- `{,m}`: maximum number of matches
- `{n,m}`: minimum and maximum number of matches

## Grouping and Capturing

- `\b`: assert position at word boundary

A word boundary is:

- Before the first character in the string, if the first character is a word
character.
- Between a word character and a non-word character.
- After the last character in a string, if the last character is a word 
character.

## Backreferences

Using `( )` creates a numbered backreference: `\n`.
The backreference number corresponds to the place of the capturing group in the
regex.
A backreference represents the characters matched by the capturing group.
For example, an appearance of two of the same letters in a row is: `([A-Z])\1`.

## Lookahead

- `(?!)`: negative lookahead `pattern_1(?!pattern_2)`. match `pattern_1` if not
immediately followed by `pattern_2`.
- `(?=)`: positive lookeahead `pattern_1(?=pattern_2)`. match `pattern_1` if it
is directly followed by `pattern_2`.
- `(?<=)`: positive lookbehind: `(?<=pattern_2)pattern_1`. match `pattern_1` if
it is immediately preceded by `pattern_2`.
- `(?<!)`: negative lookbehind: `(?<!pattern_2)pattern_1`. match `pattern_1` 
not immediately preceded by `pattern_2`.

#### Examples

```bash
# find a five-letter word where the third letter is 'j' and the last letter is 'r'
cat /usr/share/dict/american-english | grep '^..j.r$'
# Major
# major
```

```bash
# match a valid sentence
grep -E '[[:upper:]][[:upper:][:lower:] ]*\.'
```

```bash
^([[:alpha:]]+ ?)+$
```
One more alphabetic characters followed by zero or more spaces.
