# 8 December 2018

## Thoughts

I often feel left out.
The feeling pervades my life and has since I was in middle school.
It feels like this:

- There is a large group of interesting people in the world.
- Those people are all doing interesting things.
- Those people are all more interesting than me and what they do is more
  interesting than what I do.
- I feel like those people aren't interested in me.
- I should be one of those people but somehow I keep failing to be interesting
  enough.
- I expend a lot of energy on a project (e.g. a comic, a blog post,
  software) that I think will make me interesting enough.
- I finish the project.
- Regardless of the how the project is received (good, bad, or indifferent), I
  haven't become one of the interesting people.
- I try again, often by pivoting to a new pursuit that I think has more 
  potential to make me interesting.

This has been an ongoing cycle.
It is exhausting and demoralizing.
I don't just feel left out of something specific.
I feel generally disconnected from the rest of the world.
Because the experience is so common for me, being left out of "x" has become
just feeling left out generally.

At this point, I should conclude that my attempts to make myself interesting and
attract the attention of the interesting people have failed.
I've made these attempts in many settings, with many different groups in mind.
Highschool, art school, comics, software.

This cycle is not productive.
I am going around in circles.
I am more worn out and angrier each year.
A shift in perspective is called for.

A few other points:

Social media is toxic to me.
Twitter, Instagram, Mastodon, Facebook, and all other forms of social media make
me feel left out.
I'm not sure if this is true for everyone and I'm not blaming social media for 
my subjective experience.
It is good for me not to use social media.

Blogs are okay.
I don't feel this way as often when I read blogs.

I removed tracking from my website because I was just using the visitor count as
a way to feel less left out.

Social media makes me feel anxious and depressed.
As a software engineer, I don't want to work on social media.
These new decentralized social networks are kind of attractive because they
are generating a lot of buzz.
The part of me that wants to stand out, to be noticed, sees contributing to these
platforms as a way to increase my level of social standing.

This is a bad instinct.
The anxiety and depression I feel when I use social media is not limited to 
centralized, for-profit platforms.
There's something about this kind of social structure that affects me 
negatively.

What is a positive experience I've had in the last few years?
Learning has been a positive experience.
Here are some more specific positive experiences of learning:

- Learning JavaScript through Codecademy's interactive lessons.
- Learning enough German to read "Herr Eichhorn und die erste Schnee".
- Learning Haskell by reading Haskell Programming from First Principles.
- Learning the principles of peer-to-peer networks from mafintosh's p2p-network
  workshop exercises online.
- When I used inheritance in JavaScript to create the Heifer quiz. 
  I had a specific problem and an intuition that this abstract concept was the 
  solution.
  This is a really satisfying kind of moment in my ongoing self-education: I 
  move along two paths simultaneously. First, learning about things abstractly.
  Second, learning about the same topic through practie.
  When I am able to connect the abstract and the concrete, to apply the abstract,
  that is very satisfying. That is when I feel like I have learned it.
- I think reading a book in a foreign language is a similar kind of experience.
  It's satisfying to wield the new power that is only potential while I am 
  engaged in study.

Another positive experience I've had is helping other people to understand what
I understand.
Learning crystallizes understanding.
Once the understanding has been crystallized, the next satisfying step is to 
give that crystal of understanding to someone else.
Here are some experiences I've had of teaching:

- Leading a "introduction to web development" workshop for a group of highschool
  students.
- Writing "Fuzzy Thinking: Fuzz Testing and Formal Grammar". This article 
  synthesized abstract concepts and practical application. 
- Writing "Critique of a Code Meme"
- Writing "The Usefulness of Abstracting Over Time"
- Writing "Little Languages"
- Leading the introduction to ES6 workshops at Blue State Digital.

So I like to learn things myself and then give that understanding to someone 
else.
In particular, I like to learn and teach programming.

I avoided programming because I found math class hard and I thought that 
programming required you to be a math genius.
Codecademy pulled me in by prompting me to write a small bit of code, a Hello
World in JavaScript.
I didn't have to create an account on their site, open a terminal, or figure out 
how to run a program.
They made it so easy that I didn't have an excuse not to try.
Immediately, I was spellbound by the experience.

Codecademy removed barriers I had built between myself and programming, and they
demystified the topic.
They gave me a way in to something that was unapproachable and inaccessible.
And in doing so, they opened a door to a new life for me.
I want to do this for other people.
I want to take good ideas in programming and make them accessible to everyone.

I have been starved lately for work that I believe in.
I didn't believe in my work at Blue State Digital.
It was often boring, I was uninspired by the clients, and I doubted the language
that the agency uses to sell itself.
BSD is not saving the world and neither are its clients.
Everything felt like data-driven marketing.

I am also bored at Shore.
I don't think the software is worth the money customers pay for it.
I am frequently astonished that anyone pays for it.
Furthermore, I don't care about the problem it's trying to solve.

I guess that I'm not doing harm by working there.
It's not software running on a military drone.
Scheduling and customer management software for hair salons is benign.
There is a practical need for software like that, I suppose.

But I am not inspired to fill that need.
My experience there is that I am being paid a medium amount of money to make a 
small group of people (the investors and the CEO) rich.
I get nothing out of it except for that medium amount of money.
As a way to make money, the job is mediocre.
As a means of accomplishing anything else, the job is useless.

When I worked at BSD, I thought I would feel more inspired at a "better" job or 
a "better" company.
I don't think I had a clear or concrete idea of what this better job or better
company would be.
Now, I expect that I will feel uninspired and used at many jobs.

So what should I conclude from this?
There are a couple of thoughts that follow from this.
First, my mission: make good ideas in programming accessible to anyone.
More broadly, continually share my understanding.

The question then is how to accomplish this mission.
One, look for opportunities to learn and teach simultaneously.
Second, anything I am doing that is not in service to this mission should have
significant upside.

What are some upsides in jobs that don't directly serve my mission?

- Pays a lot of money. This can indirectly contribute to my mission by making it
  possible for me to save money and take a sabbatical in the future.
- Opportunity to learn something new and interesting. Anytime I am learning 
  something new and interesting, I have an opportunity to pass what I learn on 
  to someone else.
- Challenges me in a healthy way. Stressful jobs are not productive but jobs that
  require me to solve problems at the edge of my current ability help me to 
  grow as a programmer. The better programmer I am, the better I am able to 
  accomplish my mission.

Jobs that would work for me:

- A job that mixes learning and teaching programming.
- A job building educational learning.
- Freelance career that makes me enough money and leaves me enough time to 
  work on personal projects.
- A job where I make a lot of money so I can save up money quickly to attend the
  Recurse Center.
- Any job where I'm learning new and interesting things.

**Reading List**

- * Mindstorms, Papert
- The Children's Machine, Papert
- Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, Abelson and Sussman
- The Art of Doing Science and Engineering, Hamming
- The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics
- Instead of Education, Holt
- How Children Fail, Holt
- The Psychology of the Child, Piaget
- To Understand Is to Invent, Piaget
- Types and Programming Languages, Benjamin C. Pierce
- Introduction to Functional Programming, Bird and Wadler
- The Seasoned Schemer, Friedman
- How to Solve It, Polya

Other possibilities

- MIT Media Lab
- Recurse Center (definitely but need more money)
- 
