# 8 April 2018

## ActivityPub

An ActivityPub implementation can implement one or both of these layers:

- **server-to-server**: enables decentralized websites to share information.
    - distributes activities between actors on different servers
    - used to connect social graphs
- **client-to-server**: enables users to communicate.
    - permits a client to act on behalf of a user
    - client authenticates with the user's server

A user is represented by as an "actor".
The "actor" is tied to a server.
One person with two accounts on two servers means two actors.

_Problem: centralization of the actor. Is there a way to decouple identity and
server?_

Every Actor has:

- **Inbox**: get messages from the world.
- **Outbox**: send messages to the world.

An inbox and an outbox are both endpoints.
Both endpoints support `GET` and `POST`.

- `GET /inbox`: actor retrieves their incoming messages.
- `POST /inbox`: world creates a message for the actor.
- `GET /outbox`: world retrieves messages from actor.
- `POST /outbox`: actor creates a message for the world.

### ActivityStreams

_Question: what are ActivityStreams?_

ActivityPub vocabulary is taken from ActivityStreams.

ActivityStreams can be extended with JSON-LD.

> Activities sent around in ActivityPub generally follow the pattern of some
> activity by some actor being taken on some object.

## Objects

Objects are the core concept.

A "note" is an example of an Object.

The Object is wrapped in an Activity that describes what is being done with the 
Object.

Most Objects distributed by ActivityPub should have globally unique identifiers.
The exception is objects that have a short-lived importance and will not be 
looked up again, e.g. a game notification.

An identifier is usually a URL.

For client-to-server communication, the server should allocate ids to all 
id-less objects it receives from the client.

Basic object

```
{
  "id": String
  "type": String
}
```

### Actors

```json
{
  "@content": [""],
  "type": "Person",
  "id": "https://foo.net/user",
  "following": "https://foo.net/user/following.json",
  "followers": "https://foo.net/user/followers.json",
  "liked": "https://foo.net/user/liked.json",
  "inbox": "https://foo.net/inbox.json",
  "outbox": "htts://foo.net/outbox.json",
  "preferredUsername": "mister_foo",
  "name": "foo bar",
  "summary": "foo bar baz",
  "icon": ["https://foo.net/icon.svg"],
}
```

Optional properties:

- `streams`: a list of supplementary Collections that might be of interest.
- `endpoints`: a json object that maps additional useful endpoints. For example:
  - `proxyUrl`: a proxy that enables an Actor's clients to access remote objects
    that require authentication to access.
  - `oauthAuthorizationEndpoint`: when Oath 2.0 is used, authenticate at this 
    endpoint
  - `oauthTokenEndpoint`: endpoint for acquiring an access token.
  - `sharedInbox`: used for wide delivery of publicly addressed activities and
    activities sent to followers. Publicly readable OrderedCollection object 
    containing objects addressed to the Public special collection.

### Collections

`OrderedCollection` is always presented in reverse chronological order.

#### Outbox

Discoverable through the `outbox` property of an Actor's profile.

Must be an `OrderedCollection`.

Contains:

- activities the user has published.
- these activities are filtered by the permissions of the actor requesting them.
  - respond to a request for objects by an unauthorized user with a list of
    public posts.
- Accepts POST requests by the actor.

#### Inbox

Must be an `OrderedCollection`.

Content filtered by requester's permission.
(In general, the Actor can read all messages in the Actor's inbox.)

Server must de-duplicate Activities.
Duplication can occur in an Inbox when:

Activity is addressed to both:

- Actor's followers.
- Specific actor who follows the recipient actor.

#### Followers

List of every actor who sent a `Follow` activity to the actor.

#### Following

List of every other actor the actor has followed.

#### Liked

List of all the actor's liked activities.

### Public addressing

An activity can be addressed to the special "public" collection with the 
identifier: ` https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams#Public`.

Any activity addressed to this collection is publicly readable without 
authentication.

Outboxes should not try to deliver an activity to this address.
