# 2 April 2018

Reading:

- _Haskell Programming from First Principles_ by Christopher Allen and Julie Moronuki
- [A Tutorial Introduction to the Lambda Calculus](http://www.inf.fu-berlin.de/lehre/WS03/alpi/lambda.pdf) by Raul Rojas
- [Introduction to Lambda Calculus](http://www.cse.chalmers.se/research/group/logic/TypesSS05/Extra/geuvers.pdf) by Hank Barendregt and Erik Barendsen

## Haskell Book lambda calculus notes

**Overview**

Lambda calculus consists of three different components or "terms":

- Name (variable)
- Abstraction (function)
- Expression (some combination of names and/or abstractions)

A program in the lambda calculus is an expression.

A expression is a superset of the lambda terms, meaning that it can be one of 
three things:

- a name
- a function 
- an application

A program is evaluated by reducing the expression.

Reduction is the act of replacing a part of the expression with another 
expression. 

The reduction follows some rewrite rules.

The program is fully evaluated when there are no more parts that can be reduced.

When a program is completely reduced, it is in "normal form". 

**Functions**

The syntax for a function is `\x.x`.

- `\x.` is the head.
- `x` in `\x` is a function parameter.
- `.` separates the head from the body.
- The right `x` is the body, which can be any expression.

All functions take only one argument.

An expression that depends on two or more inputs is written as a function that
returns a function, repeated until all inputs are accumulated: `(\x.\y.xy)`.

For the sake of convenience, these functions are written like this: `(\xy.z)`.

A function in the lambda calculus is called an _abstraction_.

The head of a lambda function "abstracts" the expression.

In `\x.xy`, `\x` abstracts `xy`.

The set of all possible function inputs is called the function's "domain".

The set of all possible function outputs is called the function's "codomain".

The "image" of a function is the codomain for any given subset of the domain.
In `f(x) = y`, `y` is the image of `x` under `f`.

**Variables**

In `\x.x`, `x` is a "bound variable".

In `\x.y`, `y` is a "free variable".

In `(\x.x)y`, `x` is a bound variable and `y` is a free variable.

**Alpha equivalence**

`\xy.xy` is equivalent to `\yx.yx` because the abstraction follows the same 
pattern even though the variable names use different letters.

**Beta Reduction**

Applying a function to an argument means replacing all instances of the 
corresponding bound variable name in the function's head with the input 
expression.

```
(\x.xz)y
yz

(\xy.zx)ta
(\y.zt)a
zt
```

**Combinator**

A combinator is a lambda term with no free variables.

Combinators just _combine_ their arguments.

Examples:

- `\x.x`
- `\xy.xy`
- `\xyz.x`

Not combinators:

- `\x.y`
- `\xy.xyz`

**Divergence**

An expression diverges when the reduction process never ends.

```
(\x.xx)(\x.xx)
```

### Chapter Exercises

**Beta reduce**

```
(λabc.cba)zz(λwv.w)
(\bc.cbz)z(\wv.w)
(\c.ctz)(\wv.w)
(\wv.w)tz
(\v.t)z
t

(λx.λy.xyy)(λa.a)b
(\y.(\a.a)yy)b
(\a.a)bb
bb

(λy.y)(λx.xx)(λz.zq)
(\x.xx)(\z.zq)
(\z.zq)(\z.zq)
(\z.zq)q
qq

(λz.z)(λz.zz)(λz.zy)
(\z.zz)(\z.zy)
(\z.zz)(\z.zy)
(\z.zy)(\z.zy)
(\t.ty)y
ty

(λx.λy.xyy)(λy.y)y
(\y.(\a.a)yy)b
(\a.a)bb
bb

(λa.aa)(λb.ba)c
(\b.ba)(\b.ba)c
(\b.ba)ac
aac

(λxyz.xz(yz))(λx.z)(λx.a)
(\yz1.(\x.z2)z1(yz1))(\x.a)
(\z1.(\x.z2)z1((\x.a)z1))
(\z1.z2((\x.a)z1)
(\z1.z2(a))
```

## An Introduction to the Lambda Calculus by Raul Rojas

The `succ` or successor function takes an item in an enumeration (e.g. integer 
or char) and returns the following item in the enumeration.

Here, `s` is the successor function.

```
0 = \sz.z

1 = \sz.s(z)

2 = \sz.s(s(z))

3 = \sz.s(s(s(z)))

S = \wyx.y(wyx)
S0 = (\wyx.y(wyx))(\sz.z)
     \yx.y((\sz.z)yx)
     \yx.y(x) = 1

S1 = (\wyx.y(wyx))(\sz.s(z))
     (\yx.y((\sz.s(z))yx))
     (\yx.y(y(x)) = 2
```
