# 19 November 2018

## The problem with composing Monads

I've been a little fuzzy about why monad transformers are necessary.
Here are some things that confused me and some clarifications of those things.

First, I was confused by the phrase "composing Monads".
For some reason, I initially took this to mean something about composing
functions on Monads.
Composing types is related to composing functions, since higher-kinded types are
like functions.
Composing a Monad means a value where there are two "layers" of Monad on the
type level: `(Monad m, Monad n) => m (n a)`.

Second, I wasn't sure why it's not possible to implement a polymorphic Monad
instance for any two composed Monads.
Why doesn't composing two Monads give you a Monad back?
[This](https://web.cecs.pdx.edu/~mpj/pubs/RR-1004.pdf.) paper helped me to
understand.

The problem is with implementing `join`.
`join` has this type signature: `Monad m => m (m a) -> m a`.
`join` for a composition of two type signatures would need this signature:
`(Monad m, Monad n) => m (n (m (n a))) -> m (n a)`.
One thing that was confusing originally is why can't I just implement `join` here
as `join . join`?

The reason is that each join expects `m (m a)` or `n (n a)`.
So it wouldn't type check because the outer `n` stands between the two layers of
`m`.
The original formulation of a Monad (Wadler's) didn't have a `bind` method.
It had `unit`, `join`, and `map`.
`bind` is just `join . map`.
So if you can't define `join` for a type then you don't have a Monad instance.
And here, we can't define `join`.
