# 22 August 2018

## The Haskell Book, Chapter 9.8 "Spines and nonstrict evaluation"

A list is a "cons cell" of a value and another list.

```
data [] a = [] | a : [a]
```

The cons cell is the `a : [a]`.

The cons cells for the list `[1, 2, 3]` are often represented like:

```
1 : 2 : 3 : []
```

Lists, sequences, trees, and some other data structures have "spines".

The spine is what holds the data together in the collection.

The cons operator is the spine of the list. 

Some operations on lists do not require the values in the list to be evaluated.

This is possible because:

- spine
- nonstrict evaluation

Evaluating a list proceeds _down_ the spine.

Constructing a list proceeds _up_ the spine.

Spines are evaluated independent of values.

For example, you can find the length of a list without evaluating the values in
the list.

### Weak head normal form

By default, Haskell evaluates values to "weak head normal form" (WHNF).

WHNF evaluates the expression only far enough to reduce it to a data constructor.

"Normal form" is the fullest evaluation of a value.

All values in normal form are also in weak head normal form.

```haskell
-- WHNF and NF
(1, 2)

-- WHNF 
(1, 1 + 2)
(1, "foo" ++ "bar")

-- WHNF and NF
\x -> x + 10

-- not WHNF or NF
"foo" ++ "bar"

-- WHNF, not NF
[1..10]
```

A list that is in WHNF is one where the cons cells have been constructed but not
the concrete values within the cells.

Some functions are "spine strict", meaning that they do not require evaluation of
the values in a list.

`length` is spine strict.

The `_` used in pattern matching is not just a convention - the symbol is part 
of the language.
The compiler knows that it doesn't need to evaluate to normal form when it 
encounters that symbol.

In this example, `length xs2` throws an error because the _spine_, not the value
in the cons cell, is `undefined`.

```
let xs1 = [1, undefined, 3]
length xs1 
-- 3

let xs2 = [1] ++ undefined ++ [3]
length xs2
-- throws an error
```

`sum` forces the evaluation of a list to normal form.

When you map over a list, the map function is applied to items in the list 
lazily.
That means if you never access an item in the list, the map function is never 
applied to it.
