# 29 November 2018

## Beej's Guide to Network Programming

[Beej's Guide to Network Programming](https://beej.us/guide/bgnet/html/multi/index.html)

## Sockets

Unix models all input/output operations as writing to a file descriptor.

A file descriptor is an integer associated with an open file.

A socket is a file descriptor.

The `socket()` system call creates a socket.

The `send()` system call writes to the socket.
Can also use the `write()` system call used for normal files.

The `recv()` system call reads from the socket.
Can also use the `read()` system call used for normal files.

`send()` and `recv()` offer more control.

There are many kinds of socket.

Two common kinds of socket is a Datagram Socket (`SOCK_DGRAM`) and a Stream
Socket (`SOCK_STREAM`).

A Datagram Socket is a "connectionless" socket.
Datagram Sockets use the User Datagram Protocol (UDP) protocol.
UDP sends the data in chunks.
Some of these chunks might not reach the destination.
Generally used only when TCP is not an option or when dropping packets is ok.
Some protocols built on top of UDP involve an acknowledgment scheme where the 
next packet is only sent after the client confirms receiving the last packet.
UDP is also faster than TCP.

A Stream Socket is a two-way, unbroken line of communication.
Stream Sockets use the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) protocol.

## Protocols

Data encapsulation: each protocol layer adds a header to the packet as the 
packet is outgoing. When the packet reaches its destination, each protocol layer
strips the header for that protocol. So packets are like Russian nesting dolls,
where the data itself is the innermost layer.
This is a first-in, last-out process. The highest protocol layer wraps the data
first and is unwrapped last.

So network protocols are layered.
A rough layered network model for UNIX might look like:

- Application Layer (telnet, ftp)
- Host-To-Host Transport Layer (TCP, UDP)
- Internet Layer (IP)
- Network Access Layer (Ethernet, wi-fi, etc.)

Most of these layers are abstracted by the system.
Network programming in C mostly takes place at the application layer, 
implementing a protocol on top of TCP or UDP.

## IP Addresses

### IPv4

An IPv4 address has four bytes (octets) for 32 bits total.
The octets are commonly delimited by dots: `127.0.0.1`.
`127.0.0.1` is the "loopback address" in IPv4, meaning the address of the host
computer.

### IPv6

An IPv6 address has 128 bits.
The representation is hexadecimals separated by colons: 
`2001:0db8:c9d2:aee5:73e3:934a:a5ae:9551`.

Two colons `::` means any amount of 0's between the current position and the 
next non-zero char.

`::1` is the loopback address in IPv6.

`::ffff:` indicates compatability mode for IPv4: `::ffff:127.0.0.1`.

## Subnets

Sometimes the first part of an IP address identifies the network and the last 
part identifies the host.
For example, `192.0.2.12` might be the address for host `12` on network 
`192.0.2.0`.

### Netmask

A netmask enables you to identify what portion of an address identifies the 
network.

#### The old style

The old way of using a netmask was to have a second string of digits.
The IP address was shifted using the bitwise-AND by those digits.

Example:

```
192.0.2.12 is the address
192.0.2.0 is the network
12 is the host
255.255.255.252 is the netmask
(192 & 255) (0 & 255) (2 & 255) (12 & 252) -> 192.0.2.0
```

#### The new style

The new style is to append the address with a suffix that indicates how many
bits identify the network: `192.0.2.12/30`.
`192.0.2.12/30` says that the first 30 bits identify the network.

## Port

Port numbers enable multiple connections to the same IP address.
`127.0.0.1:3000` and `127.0.0.1:80` are both at the same network location, but
different ports.

## Byte Order

Big-Endian: a sequence of bytes stored left-to-right.
Also called Network Byte Order.

Little-Endian: a sequence of bytes stored right-to-left.
Mostly associated with Intel or Intel-compatible processors.

A computer stores bytes in Host Byte Order, which can be big or little endian.

You should just assume that the Host Byte Order is wrong and always convert to 
Network Byte Order before sending.
Then convert from Network Byte Order to Host Byte Order when receiving.

You can convert to short (two bytes) or long (four bytes).
Here are the conversion functions:

```
htons() - host to network short
htonl() - host to network long
ntohs() - network to host short
ntohl() - network to host long
```

## `struct`s

### `addrinfo`

This is a collection of data that is used for things like prepping the socket 
to be used, host name lookups, and service name lookups.

Notable fields:

```
ai_family; // can be used to force IPv4 or IPv6, or AF_UNSPEC to be version agnostic
ai_socktype; // SOCK_STREAM, SOCK_DGRAM 
ai_protocol; // 0 for 'any' protocol
```

`getaddrinfo()` returns a linked list of these AddrInfo structs.
Don't need to fill the entire struct out manually.
Can just specify fields of interest and then `getaddrinfo()` will fill in the 
rest.

### `sockaddr`

Contains information about a socket address.

## System calls

### `getaddrinfo()`

Returns a linked list of `addrinfo` structs. 
Use to set the scene for later system calls on the socket.

Arguments

1. `node`: an ip address or dns name
1. `service`: e.g., a port number
1. `hints`: this is a partial addrinfo struct. the value are used in bulding the
returned `addrinfo`.

###  `socket()`

Returns a socket descriptor to be used for later system calls.

Arguments

1. `domain`: IPv4 or IPv6
1. `type`: e.g. stream or datagram
1. `protocol`: UPD or TCP, generally set to `0` (0 is any) so the protocol 
matches the socket type.

Use the values from the `getaddrinfo()` call as the arguments to `socket()`.

### `bind()`

Associate a socket with a port on the host machine.
This enables the computer to match an incoming packet with the socket descriptor.
This way, you can receive incoming data from the network.
This is usually done when you want to call `listen()` on the socket.
If you've created the socket only for sending data, then it is not necessary.

### `connect()`

Connect a socket to a network location.
You do not have to call `bind()` before calling `connect()`.
If the socket is not associated with a port, the kernel will assign it a port
when `connect()` is called.

### `listen()`

Start listening for connections to the socket. 
You can set a limit for the number of queued (unhandled) connections.
The system will set its own default limit if not provided.
5 - 10 is a reasonable limit.

### `accept()`

So far, everything has been happening on the original socket.
But each new connection from a remote host is handled on a new socket.
`accept()` returns a new socket representing I/O for a connection.
The original socket continues to listen for connections.
The connection socket is used for `send()` and `recv` calls.

### `send()`

These system calls are used for communication over stream sockets.
`send()` returns the number of bytes sent.
This number is sometimes less than the number of bytes in the message.
You must then send the remaining bytes.

### `recv()`

`recv()` reads data from the network into a buffer.
You can set the maximum size of a buffer.
When `recv()` returns 0, it means the connection has closed.

### `sendto()` and `recvfrom`

`sendto()` and `recvfrom()` are the datagram versions of `send()` and `recv()`.

### `close()`

Close the connection on a socket.

### `shutdown()`

`shutdown()` enables you to partially close a connection by passing a `how` 
argument:

```
0 - stop receiving data
1 - stop sending data
2 - stop sending and receiving (like close)
```

### `getpeername()`

Get the addrinfo for a peer from a socket with a remote connection.

## Blocking

`accept` and all the receive functions are "blocking".
This means that the thread "sleeps" until `accept` produces a connection or 
a packet is received.

When calls are blocking, how do you listen for new connections _and_ receive
new data at the same time?

You can also create "non-blocking" sockets.
The runtime polls the sockets to see if there's any new state.
This is bad because it hogs CPU time.

## Synchronous I/O Multiplexing

A better way to do non-blocking I/O is to use `select()`.
`select()` tells you which sockets are ready for reading, which for writing, 
and which have raised exceptions.
