# 10 December 2018

## A Little Language for User Interfaces

I'm looking for ideas for little languages.
I first defined little languages as languages used to introduce a concept.
Now I think it is better to define a little language as languages used to 
introduce domains.
A domain here means a set of related concepts.

I've shifted from a language for one idea to a language for one domain because
I think it is hard to have an interesting language when the language is 
exclusive to one idea.
Necessarily, you have to bring in related ideas to make the language useable.
It is important for the language to be useable because its usefulness for 
the purpose of teaching is dependent on absorbing the user, being fun and
interesting to use.

A little language for user interfaces would be a language that introduces the 
user to the domain of user interface programming.

The language should:

- Give a high level overview of user interface programming.
- Not have a lot of details
- Make it easy to see and interact with the high-level aspects of the domain
- Semantics should not be specific to any platform
- Intuitions should be transferrable to other platforms, like a web browser
- User can build something interesting but constrained (like LEGO)

So I need to identity the fundamentals of the domain.
There are a few fundamental concepts I remember learning when I started to build 
dynamic user interfaces:

- Displaying a dynamic list
- Handling DOM events
- Making HTTP requests
- Managing state

The language should also demonstrate the idea of a view as a function of state.

How can the domain of user interface programming be simplified?
- Reduce the entire set of DOM elements to a few
  - Maybe there are only two elements: Block and Text
  - Text is just text
  - A Block can be customized by giving it a list of Behaviors
  - Behaviors define things like
    - Alignment
    - Width
    - Events
- Reduce the entire set of DOM events to a few
  - Click: maps to the click event
  - Type: when a user types in a text box
  - Any element that has a Click behavior is clickeable
  - Any element that has a Type behavior becomes a textarea
- Abstract HTTP requests and remote data sources
  - Storage: could be implemented with something like local storage.

Maybe the whole thing is a grid
The user defines the grid dimensions
The user renders the grid?
Or the user defines functions that just handle events from the grid.
The point is to write rules about what color the grid square is.
So then you'd need some color functions.
You'd need some math functions.
You'd have functions and numbers.

What language features are supported?

- Functions 
- Tagged union types
  - Tagged union types can be used to implement most data structures
  - Might need a syntax sugar for lists and tuples
- Strings

I'd like this language to be what LEGO is to construction.
The user can build something interesting but constrained.
Maybe there are only lists, functions, and strings.

What if there was a little language that enabled people to play with building
user interfaces in a browser.
This language would not require any understanding of the browser environment or
the underlying technologies.
You would not be able to build _any_ user interfaces.
The language would give you a few simple building blocks that would enable you 
to build something constrained but interesting, like LEGO blocks.
By building something with this language, you come to understand the fundamental 
aspects of building a user interface.

What are those aspects?
Input and output remain the fundamental categories.
You could also call this read and interact.

Read

- Static display of information
- Dynamic display of information
  - Mapping a list of data to a list of text

Act

- Click
- Type

What are the building blocks

- Appearance
- Events
- Structure

- Display output 
  - Display text
- Receive input
  - Click
  - Type

Things in my mind for this

- displaying information
- responding to user input
- view is a function of state
- remote data sources

Features

- Tagged union types
- Functions
- String
- List
- Tuple

```
thing Tuple x y = Tuple x y

thing Block = Block [Piece] Block | Text String

thing Piece = Outline Outline.Outline | Color Color.Color | Space Space.Space | Action Action.Action

thing Outline = Outlined | None

thing Color = One | Two | Three

thing Space = Top Top | Side Side | Width Width

thing Action msg = Click msg | Type msg

thing Top = Top | Bottom | Center

thing Side = Left | Right | Center

text [] "x" 

block 
  [ (Side, Center)
  , (Top, Center)
  , (Click, BlockClicked)
  , (Type, BlockTyped)
  ]
  text "Hello, World!"

main = block
```

Powers
Descriptions
Characteristics
Items
Values
Things
Personalities
Powers
Aspects
Molecules
Fields
Fundamentals
Atoms
Candida
Stuff

[https://ryancan.build/blog/code-kit-process](https://ryancan.build/blog/code-kit-process)
[https://github.com/andrejbauer/plzoo/tree/master/src/minihaskell](https://github.com/andrejbauer/plzoo/tree/master/src/minihaskell)
[https://docs.racket-lang.org/pollen/](https://docs.racket-lang.org/pollen/)
[https://beautifulracket.com/stacker/why-make-languages.html](https://beautifulracket.com/stacker/why-make-languages.html)
[https://ryancan.build/projects/littlebits-education-code-kit](https://ryancan.build/projects/littlebits-education-code-kit)
